---
title: "Yet Another Blog? Why? (Or: You'll Be Fine)"
date: 2020-09-20
---

<p>Yet another blog? Why?</p>
<p>I returned to programming recently after years away, and it isn't the first time I tried to do so. I tried in 2014 with a diploma in game development (which I completed), and in 2017-18 with a series of W3C and Mooc courses (most finished, but I didn't bother with the certificates). In both cases I got back to coding competency in at least a couple of languages, but never went further. </p>
<p>Why? A few reasons. To be honest, inertia was part of it because I simply didn't need the money that badly. Some job in my other fields of expertise would come along, and it was easy to take the opportunity in front of me and put programming on the back burner.</p>
<p>But the other big reason was that programming as a profession has changed quite a lot, and I needed to come to grips with that before pushing beyond coding competency to coding employability. And coming to grips with those changes as a returning programmer is not the same as coming to grips with it early in one's career. That wasn't a subject I'd seen covered much. So when I was learning Github and prompted to start a blog as an exercise, it was a logical thing to talk about.</p>
<p>For dot com boomers like me, who coded mostly in the era of, say, 1995-2005 (which means we grew up pre-internet), there is a double whammy. Not only has the profession changed, the way people learn has changed as well. For those of us who grew up pre-internet, learning was necessarily structured. You didn't have the liberty of dipping in and out of a subject as needed - dipping into a subject was a new trip to the library. You started by mining an understanding of the macro view, and that informed your next level down of enquiry. You also couldn't count on the information being available again next time. If a book was borrowed by someone else, or if it was yours but you lost or damaged it, you were stuck. You needed to memorise much more than you do now.</p>
<p>What older adult learners are finding now, in all subjects, is that when we return to learning, learning is not geared to our learning styles anymore. Learning is delivered in small sound bytes, start in the middle, minimal context, immediate immersion. For people who are accustomed to situating themselves with structure and high level holistic understanding, this learning style is not intuitive, it's fragmented and chaotic. It doesn't build the confidence and groundedness that older learners rely on to integrate knowledge.</p>
<p>Does this mean modern learning resources are useless to the older learner? No. You absolutely can teach an old(er) dog new tricks. But it isn't walked about, so older learners who feel disconnected from learning material feel like they are failing to grasp something, like a piece they are used to getting isn't there. It undermines our confidence, until someone says, "It isn't you. The thing you think is missing, is missing from the material, not from you. Go with it, it will come in bits and pieces later. You'll be fine."</p>
<p>So this is me, a stranger, but one who's been there, telling you what I wish someone had told me in 2014 or 2017 or 2018. It isn't you. The thing you think is missing, is missing from the material, not from you. Go with it, it will come in bits and pieces later. You'll be fine.</p>
